Course Syllabus for "CS411: Non-Standard Computing"
---------------------------------------------------

This is a course that will cover several unconventional computational
methods and theories, such as quantum computation, DNA and molecular
computation, genetic algorithms, and cellular automata.  Note: Before
taking this course, it is strongly recommended that you complete Cell
Biology ([BIO301](http://www.saylor.org/courses/bio301/)).  This course
is inspired by reality-based computing from the natural world.  It
explores new computational paradigms that break the classical
computational assumptions.  The real world provides the inspiration for
novel computations through the genetic algorithms, complex adaptive
systems, self-organizing networks, and quantum computing. In the first
unit, we will review the basics of computational theory.  We will
discuss information representation, languages, programs, concept of
non-determinism, finite-state transducers, and Turing transducers.  The
second unit covers the structure and manipulation of DNA for
computational purposes as well as the development of biocomputers and
biologically derived materials for computational purposes.  The third
unit is about genetic algorithms.  In the fourth unit, there is a
description of a cellular automaton, and we will discuss some properties
of the regular language sets generated by a finite number of steps of
cellular automaton evolution.  We will use resources by Stephen Wolfram
to explore cellular automaton behavior.  Also, we will learn about a
standard cellular neural network model and its potential applications. 
Then, we will view a video about the complex systems or system composed
of interconnected parts that as a whole exhibit one or more properties
not obvious from the properties of the individual parts.  The last unit
consists of topics related to quantum computation.  It shows quantum
notation, how arbitrary logic gates may be constructed for quantum bits,
as well as a description of a simple model for a quantum computer.  At
the end of the course, you will find video lectures by David Deutsch. 
These lectures are about the quantum theory of computation and show
examples of how quantum computation should work.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able
to:  
  

-   Describe abstracted finite-memory program, a finite state automaton,
    and regular language.
-   List and explain the characteristics of universal Turing
    transducers.
-   Describe the computational idea behind the DNA-based computer.
-   Explain the differences between bio-electronic, biochemical, and
    biomechanical computers.
-   Describe the functional principles of genetic algorithms and list
    their limitations.
-   Define the cellular automaton and the cellular neural network, and
    show examples of how they compute.
-   Describe how logic gates may be constructed for quantum bits.
-   Describe a simple model for a quantum computer based on a classical
    computer.
-   Describe an algorithm which makes use of quantum parallelism.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer.  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader or Flash).  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.).  
  
 √    Be competent in the English language.

√    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook.](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf)
